Branch Deployment Guide (#9046)
dagster-io/dagster: docs/content/guides/dagster/branch_depl_with_snowflake.mdx

---
title: Branch Deployments with Snowflake | Dagster
description: This guide illustrates a workflow that enables testing Dagster code in your cloud environment without impacting your production data.
---

> # Branch Deployments with Snowflake

Reviewer: Maybe too late in the game to open up a title discussion, but to me "Branch Deployments with Snowflake" makes me think we are using Snowflake to make Branch Deployments work, rather than creating fresh dbs for branch deployments to use for testing.  I'm having a hard time coming up with alternativesI like though. 

"Using Dagster to create snowflake dbs for cloud branch deployments" 
"Using Dagster Cloud Branch Deployments with Isolated Snowflake Databases for Testing" 

all of these seem really wordy to me

This guide details a workflow to test Dagster code in your cloud environment without impacting your production data. To highlight this functionality, we’ll leverage Dagster Cloud branch deployments and a Snowflake database to:

- Execute code on a feature branch directly on Dagster Cloud

> - Read and write to a clone of our Snowflake data

Reviewer 2: Would help to spell out that we'll have a clone per-branch.

With these tools, we can merge changes with confidence in the impact on our data platform and with assurance that our code will execute as intended.

### Prerequisites

> 

Reviewer: maybe a note about how branch deployments is a cloud only feature?

Reviewer 2: Yeah I think we should make this very prominent so that people don't get an unpleasant surprise.  Maybe even include the Cloud logo somehow? cc @erinkcochran87 @braunjj for ideas on how to communicate this.

Reviewer 3: I wouldn't include the logo - I think it'd feel distracting. IMO listing it in the prereqs like this ^ is enough.

<Note>
  This guide is an extension of the{" "}

>   <a href="https://docs.dagster.io/guides/dagster/local-to-production-tutorial">

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

  <Link href="/guides/dagster/local-to-production-tutorial">
```
we should use relative link and use `<Link>` like here: https://github.com/dagster-io/dagster/blame/master/docs/content/deployment/overview.mdx#L40-L42 - so the internal reference can be handled by versioning and won't break in the future

    Transitioning Data Pipelines from Development to Production
  </a>{" "}
  guide, illustrating a workflow for staging deployments. We’ll use the examples
  from this guide to build a workflow atop Dagster Cloud’s branch deployment
  feature.
</Note>

This guide utilizes GitHub actions to trigger deployment—you’ll need to be using GitHub as your version control platform. You’ll also need to follow the [branch deployment setup guide](https://docs.dagster.cloud/guides/branch-deployments) and clone the [branch deployments quickstart template](https://github.com/dagster-io/dagster-cloud-branch-deployments-quickstart). After doing this, you should have:

- A running agent to serve your branch deployments
- A Dagster project set up for branch deployments containing the following:
  - `branch_deployments.yml` GitHub workflow file
  - Dagster repository (we’ve named ours `repo`)
  - Dockerfile that installs your Dagster project

If you’re new to Dagster, here’s an overview of the main concepts we’ll be using:

> - [Asset](https://docs.dagster.io/concepts/assets/software-defined-assets) - an asset is a software object that models a data asset. The prototypical example is a table in a database or a file in cloud storage.

Reviewer 2: I think this section could be more powerful if, instead of giving explanations of these concepts that readers can already find on the concept pages, we explained how we intend to use them in this example.  E.g. for "job", we could say "We'll use a job that runs once per branch to set up a Snowflake database in our branch deployment".

- [Resource](https://docs.dagster.io/concepts/resources) - a resource is an object that models a connection to a (typically) external service. Resources can be shared between assets and different implementations of resources can be swapped in depending on environment. For example, a resource may provide methods to send messages in Slack.
- [IO manager](https://dagster-git-jamie-local-to-prod-example-elementl.vercel.app/concepts/io-management/io-managers) - an IO manager is a special kind of resource that handles storing and loading assets. For example, if we wanted to store assets in S3, we would use Dagster’s built in S3 IO manager.
- [Op](https://docs.dagster.io/concepts/ops-jobs-graphs/ops) - an op is a unit of computation that accepts inputs and passes outputs to other ops.
- [Graph](https://docs.dagster.io/concepts/ops-jobs-graphs/graphs) - a graph is an interconnected set of ops.

> - [Job](https://docs.dagster.io/concepts/ops-jobs-graphs/jobs#jobs) - a job is the main unit of execution in Dagster. Internally, it is a graph bound to a set of resources and execution configuration.

Reviewer 4: all the links should be relative

### Overview

We have a `PRODUCTION` Snowflake database with a schema named `HACKER_NEWS`. In our production cloud environment, we’d like to write tables to Snowflake containing subsets of Hacker News data. These tables will be:

> - `items` (the entire dataset)
> - `comments` (data about comments)
> - `stories` (data about stories)

Reviewer 3: Why the parentheses instead of just a list with dashes? I find this formatting a bit odd. In my head, I read parentheses as an aside, like someone whispering to me or tapping my shoulder. 

```suggestion
- `items` - A table containing the entire dataset
- `comments` - A table containing data about comments
- `stories` - A table containing data about stories
```

> In order to set up a branch deployment workflow to construct and test these tables, we will:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To set up a branch deployment workflow to construct and test these tables, we will:
```

`In order` feels unnecessary here. If you want to keep it, I suggest making the end of this sentence be `we will need to:`

> 1. Define these tables as [assets](https://docs.dagster.io/concepts/assets/software-defined-assets).

Reviewer 4: relative link

2. Configure our assets to write to Snowflake using a different connection (credentials and database name) for two environments: production and branch deployment.

> 3. Clone our production database upon each branch deployment launch, naming each clone `PRODUCTION_CLONE_<ID>`, where `<ID>` is the pull request ID of the branch. We’ll create a branch deployment to test our Hacker News assets.

Reviewer: > We'll create a branch deployment to test our Hacker News assets

I think this could be step 4 (and then the next step would be step 5)

Reviewer: circling back to this - i see now that the numbers of these steps correspond to the sections in the guide. I don't think creating a branch deployment is worthy of it's own section (it fits nicely with section 3) but maybe the sentence here could be something like "Then we'll create a branch deployment and test our Hacker News assets against our newly cloned database"

4. Delete the corresponding database clone upon closing the feature branch.

> ### Step 1: Create our job

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
---

## Step 1: Create our job
```

[1]

> In production, we want to write three tables to Snowflake: items, comments, and stories. We can define these tables as [assets](https://docs.dagster.io/concepts/assets/software-defined-assets) as follows:

Reviewer: I've been trying to put the asset names in code formatting (eg `items`) in my guide. we should pick a format to be consistent

Reviewer 3: Please use code formatting.

```python file=/guides/dagster/local_to_prod_tutorial/assets.py startafter=start_assets endbefore=end_assets
# assets.py

@asset(
    config_schema={"N": int},
    required_resource_keys={"hn_client"},
)
def items(context) -> pd.DataFrame:
    """Items from the Hacker News API: each is a story or a comment on a story."""
    hn_client = context.resources.hn_client

    rows = []
    # Hacker News API is 1-indexed, so adjust range by 1
    for item_id in range(context.op_config["N"] + 1, hn_client.fetch_max_item_id() + 1):
        rows.append(hn_client.fetch_item_by_id(item_id))

    result = pd.DataFrame(rows, columns=hn_client.item_field_names).drop_duplicates(
        subset=["id"]
    )
    result.rename(columns={"by": "user_id"}, inplace=True)
    return result

@asset
def comments(items: pd.DataFrame) -> pd.DataFrame:
    """Comments from the Hacker News API."""
    return items[items["type"] == "comment"]

@asset
def stories(items: pd.DataFrame) -> pd.DataFrame:
    """Stories from the Hacker News API."""
    return items[items["type"] == "story"]
```

> As you can see, our assets use a [resource](https://docs.dagster.io/\_apidocs/libraries/dagster-snowflake#dagster_snowflake.snowflake_resource) named `hn_client` (source code available in the [Transitioning Data Pipelines from Development to Production](/guides/dagster/local-to-production-tutorial#part-one-local-development) guide). Using a resource allows us to swap out implementations per environment without modifying our computational code.

Reviewer: I recently restructured the assets again to remove the hn client resource and only introduce it in the Testing section. so if you use the version without the hn resource this can be deleted

Reviewer 2: "computational code" is a little redundant - maybe replace with "business logic"?

> ### Step 2: Configure our job for each environment

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
---

## Step 2: Configure our job for each environment
```

[1]

> At runtime, we’d like to determine which environment our code is running in: branch deployment, or production. This is valuable information that will dictate how our code should execute—with which credentials and with which database. We’ll use a different set of credentials in each environment to ensure we can’t accidentally write to production within our branch deployment, and we’ll write to our database clone in our branch deployment instead of `PRODUCTION`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At runtime, we’d like to determine which environment our code is running in: branch deployment or production. This information dictates how our code should execute, specifically with which credentials and which database.

To ensure we can't accidentally write to production within our branch deployment, we'll use a different set of credentials from production and write to our database clone.
```

Edited this for clarity. Thoughts on the second paragraph?

Author: This looks great to me!

> Dagster automatically sets certain environment variables containing deployment metadata, allowing us to read these environment variables to discern between deployments. For a full list of preset environment variables, visit this link. We can access the `DAGSTER_CLOUD_IS_BRANCH_DEPLOYMENT` environment variable to determine the currently executing environment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Dagster automatically sets certain environment variables containing deployment metadata, allowing us to read these environment variables to discern between deployments. We can access the `DAGSTER_CLOUD_IS_BRANCH_DEPLOYMENT` environment variable to determine the currently executing environment. Refer to [TODO: PAGE TITLE]() for a full list of preset environment variables.
```

Including the reference link in the middle felt a bit odd to me, along with how it was phrased.

> Because we want to configure our assets to write to Snowflake using a different set of credentials and database in each environment, we’ll configure a separate IO manager for each environment:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Because we want to configure our assets to write to Snowflake using a different set of credentials and database in each environment, we’ll configure a separate I/O manager for each environment:
```

[2]
Making this `I/O` as per a recent style guide decision - I know I pointed this out on another docs PR of yours recently where it was `IO`. This is the last time it changes!

```python file=/guides/dagster/local_to_prod_tutorial/branch_depl_tutorial/repository_v1.py startafter=start_repository endbefore=end_repository
@repository
def repo():
    snowflake_config = {
        "account": {"env": "SNOWFLAKE_ACCOUNT"},
        "user": {"env": "SNOWFLAKE_USER"},
        "password": {"env": "SNOWFLAKE_PASSWORD"},

>         "schema": {"env": "SNOWFLAKE_SCHEMA"},

Reviewer: for consistency with the local->prod guide we should decide if schema will be hardcoded in config or accessed via string source. right now mine has it hard coded, but i can switch

Reviewer 2: IMO it should be set in code - we shouldn't put the onus on whomever is configuring env vars in cloud to know about how we want to organize things in Snowflake

    }
    resource_defs = {
        "branch": {
            "hn_client": hn_api_client,
            "snowflake_io_mgr": snowflake_io_manager.configured(
                {
                    **snowflake_config,
                    "database": f"PRODUCTION_CLONE_{os.getenv('DAGSTER_CLOUD_PULL_REQUEST_ID')}",
                }
            ),
        },
        "production": {
            "hn_client": hn_api_client,
            "snowflake_io_mgr": snowflake_io_manager.configured(
                {
                    **snowflake_config,
                    "database": "PRODUCTION",
                }
            ),
        },
    }

>     def get_current_env():

Reviewer: One thing i'm still unclear on is what env vars are set by us in dagster cloud. In my guide I'm referencing a var called DAGSTER_DEPLOYMENT as a placeholder, but if all we have access to is a var that tells us if we're in a branch deployment or not, I'll need to come up with a way to differentiate between local and prod. do you know if there's a list of the env vars we have anywhere?

Author: here's a list from the PR: https://github.com/dagster-io/internal/pull/2697/files

Though this PR has since been reverted, so we'll have to double check on this once the env vars are merged again

        is_branch_depl = os.getenv("DAGSTER_CLOUD_IS_BRANCH_DEPLOYMENT")
        assert is_branch_depl != None  # env var must be set
        return "branch" if is_branch_depl else "prod"

    return [
        with_resources([items, comments, stories], resource_defs=resource_defs[get_current_env()]),
    ]
```

> ### Step 3: Cloning production database per branch deployment

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Step 3: Clone a production database per branch deployment
```

[1]

> The `branch_deployments.yml` workflow file from the [quickstart template](https://github.com/dagster-io/dagster-cloud-branch-deployments-quickstart) defines a `dagster_cloud_build_push` job that builds each branch deployment. We can modify this workflow file to add a custom step that launches a job within our repository upon deployment.

Reviewer: maybe "launches a job that will clone the production database"??

otherwise i really like this paragraph. it adds a ton of context in an easy to understand way

Reviewer 3: +1

> We’ll first need to define a job that clones our `PRODUCTION` database for each branch deployment. Each clone will be named `PRODUCTION_CLONE_<ID>` with `<ID>` representing the pull request ID, ensuring each branch deployment has a unique clone. This job will drop a database clone if it exists, and then reclone from production, ensuring each redeployment has a fresh clone of `PRODUCTION`:

Reviewer: idk if this is something we can add in somewhere, but i think it's pretty cool that we're using dagster to set up dbs so that we can test other dagster things. it's a neat display of a broad variety of uses for dagster

> We’ll first need to define a job that clones our `PRODUCTION` database for each branch deployment. Each clone will be named `PRODUCTION_CLONE_<ID>` with `<ID>` representing the pull request ID, ensuring each branch deployment has a unique clone. This job will drop a database clone if it exists, and then reclone from production, ensuring each redeployment has a fresh clone of `PRODUCTION`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We’ll first need to define a job that clones our `PRODUCTION` database for each branch deployment. Each clone will be named `PRODUCTION_CLONE_<ID>` with `<ID>` representing the pull request ID, ensuring each branch deployment has a unique clone. This job will drop a database clone if it exists and then reclone from production, ensuring each redeployment has a fresh clone of `PRODUCTION`:
```

Removing an unneeded comma

```python file=/guides/dagster/local_to_prod_tutorial/branch_depl_tutorial/clone_and_drop_db.py startafter=start_clone_db endbefore=end_clone_db
@op(required_resource_keys={"snowflake"})
def drop_database_clone(context):
    context.resources.snowflake.execute_query(
        f"DROP DATABASE IF EXISTS PRODUCTION_CLONE_{os.environ['DAGSTER_CLOUD_PULL_REQUEST_ID']}"
    )

@op(required_resource_keys={"snowflake"}, ins={"start": In(Nothing)})
def clone_production_database(context):
    context.resources.snowflake.execute_query(
        f"CREATE DATABASE PRODUCTION_CLONE_{os.environ['DAGSTER_CLOUD_PULL_REQUEST_ID']} CLONE \"PRODUCTION\""
    )

@graph
def clone_prod():
    clone_production_database(start=drop_database_clone())
```

> We’ve defined `drop_database_clone` and `clone_production_database` to utilize the [Snowflake resource](https://docs.dagster.io/\_apidocs/libraries/dagster-snowflake#dagster_snowflake.snowflake_resource). The Snowflake resource will use the same configuration as the Snowflake IO manager to generate a connection to Snowflake. However, while our IO manager writes outputs to Snowflake, the Snowflake resource executes queries against Snowflake.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We’ve defined `drop_database_clone` and `clone_production_database` to utilize the [Snowflake resource](https://docs.dagster.io/\_apidocs/libraries/dagster-snowflake#dagster_snowflake.snowflake_resource). The Snowflake resource will use the same configuration as the Snowflake I/O manager to generate a connection to Snowflake. However, while our I/O manager writes outputs to Snowflake, the Snowflake resource executes queries against Snowflake.
```

[2]

            {
                **snowflake_config,
                "database": f"PRODUCTION_CLONE_{os.getenv('DAGSTER_CLOUD_PULL_REQUEST_ID')}",
            }
        ),
        "snowflake": snowflake_resource.configured(
            {
                **snowflake_config,
                "database": f"PRODUCTION_CLONE_{os.getenv('DAGSTER_CLOUD_PULL_REQUEST_ID')}",
            }
        ),
    },
    "production": {
        "hn_client": hn_api_client,
        "snowflake_io_mgr": snowflake_io_manager.configured(
            {
                **snowflake_config,
                "database": "PRODUCTION",
            }
        ),
        "snowflake": snowflake_resource.configured({**snowflake_config, "database": "PRODUCTION"}),
    },
}
```

Then, we can add the `clone_prod` job to our repository:

```python file=/guides/dagster/local_to_prod_tutorial/branch_depl_tutorial/repository_v2.py startafter=start_repository endbefore=end_repository
@repository
def repo():
    ...
    return [
        with_resources([items, comments, stories], resource_defs=resource_defs[get_current_env()]),
        clone_prod.to_job(resource_defs=resource_defs[get_current_env()]),
    ]
```

> In our `branch_deployments.yml` file, we’ll add an additional step to the existing `dagster_cloud_build_push` job that queues a run of `clone_prod` within each branch deployment upon launch. The `if` condition below ensures that `PRODUCTION` will not be cloned if the pull request is closed:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In our `branch_deployments.yml` file, we’ll add an additional step to the existing `dagster_cloud_build_push` job that queues a run of `clone_prod` within each branch deployment upon launch. The `if` condition below ensures that the `PRODUCTION` database will not be cloned if the pull request is closed:
```

Maybe?

```yaml file=/guides/dagster/local_to_prod_tutorial/branch_depl_tutorial/clone_prod.yaml
name: Dagster Branch Deployments
  on:
    pull_request:
      types: [opened, synchronize, reopened, closed]
  env:
    DAGSTER_CLOUD_URL: ${{ secrets.DAGSTER_CLOUD_URL }}
    REGISTRY_URL: ${{ secrets.REGISTRY_URL }}

  jobs:
    dagster_cloud_build_push:
      runs-on: ubuntu-latest
      name: Dagster Branch Deployments
      strategy:
        ...
      steps:
        ...
        - name: Clone Snowflake schema upon launch
          if: github.event.action != 'closed'
          uses: dagster-io/cloud-branch-deployments-action/run@main
          with:
            location: ${{ toJson(matrix.location) }}
            deployment: ${{ steps.deploy.outputs.deployment }}
            repository: repo
            job: clone_prod
          env:
            DAGSTER_CLOUD_API_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.DAGSTER_CLOUD_API_TOKEN }}
```

> Opening a pull request for our current branch will automatically kick off a branch deployment. After the deployment launches, we can confirm that the `clone_prod` job is run:

Reviewer: does the db reclone when you push updates to the PR?

Reviewer 3: +1

Author: updated the doc to make this more clear!

<Image
alt="instance-overview"
src="/images/guides/local_to_production/branch_deployments/instance_overview.png"
width={1301}
height={805}
/>

We can also view our database in Snowflake to confirm that a clone exists for each branch deployment. When we materialize our assets within our branch deployment, we’ll now be writing to our clone of `PRODUCTION`. Within Snowflake, we can run queries against this clone to confirm the validity of our data:

<Image
alt="instance-overview"
src="/images/guides/local_to_production/branch_deployments/snowflake.png"
width={1431}
height={537}
/>

> ### Step 4: Delete our database clone upon closing a branch

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
---

## Step 4: Delete the database clone upon closing a branch
```

[1]
